---
layout: page
title: Home
---

\#CS4RL

From the [LIBER Citizen Science Working
Group](https://libereurope.eu/working-group/liber-citizen-science-working-group/).

A book to be released incrementally in sections before the end of 2021.

*Working document - v1.0 [#268bdca](268bdcab80b51784323a2f093c5b71ce8a230363),
 25 Jan 2020*

## Invites to contribute

Contributions are warmly welcomed by the editorial board on ideas or examples of
connecting the public with research library activities. Different types and sizes of contributions welcome: step-by-step guides, short picture and documentation stories, to pointers to online resources like videos or learning packages. In addition suggestions for sections outline are welcome. The publication will be
peer reviewed and has an editorial board as well as external reviewers – details
will be announced soon.

## Mission statement

The guide is designed to be a practical and compact gateway publication for the
purpose of assisting research libraries to start setting up a Citizen Science
programme.

Citizen Science for research libraries is a way to build new and more engaged
audiences as a way to establish new links between science and society.

The guide will address the unique context of research libraries – as becoming
the ‘go to place’ for the new and exciting Open Science data world that is
opening up to the wider public.

As a starting point the guide will use four recommendations for Citizen Science
from the [LIBER Open Science Roadmap](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1303002):
infrastructures; good scientific practice; guidelines, and; skilling.

## Contents (TBC)

The content will be organised around the following four main sections and
release in sequential modules for reuse. The top level sections are set but the section contents should be seen as working ideas.

1.  **Infrastructures:** As being active in the development of infrastructure
    for researchers to carry out Citizen Science;

    - Open Science research toolkits for the public: Cloud based open-source research tools and webspace provision for the public, as well as simple guides for their use. (case study)
    - Library Space Technology Network ([LSTN](https://lstn.wolba.ch/)) - 'The LSTN project offers public library communities the chance to build and engage with space technology'. Opportunity to install ground station, explore metadata, and engage in micro-satellites with [MetaSat](https://schema.space/). Biblioteca Municipală "B.P. Hasdeu" Chișinău, Moldova. LSTN is a project by [Wolbach Library](https://library.cfa.harvard.edu/) in collaboration with [Libre Space Foundation](https://libre.space/). (case study)
    - Citizen Science and Open Access Literature - Citizen Dashboards, data mining, etc. How can the public use and distribute OA literature at the same time as learning data science skills. [Open Climate Knowledge](https://ockproject.org/) is one such project in the area of climate change. (case study)


2.  **Good [open] scientific practice:** as managing bodies around knowledge
    libraries that can translate good [Open Science] scholarly practice into new
    Citizen Science fields;



3.  **Guidelines:** develop guidelines for Citizen Science activities involving
    the library, and;

4.  **Skills:** Citizen Science skills development for staff, researchers, and
    public.

## Contact

Editor-in-chief, Simon Worthington, <simon.worthington@tib.eu> \|
[\@mrchristian99](https://twitter.com/mrchristian99)

## Roadmap

First section will be released mid-April 2021, with the publication released as
a first full version by the end of 2021.

## Production

The book is intended as a short guide and will be approximately one hundred
pages in length. The publication will be produced as multi-format and
multi-channel (print-on-demand, PDF, Webbook, website, eBook, and as a Jupyter
Book – and will be technically designed for reuse, for example in – community
translations or in MOOCs.

Book sections will be released incrementally as they are ready. Ideally the book
will become a community owned publication with regular updates.

## Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge [The Library & Community Guide to Citizen
Science](http://media.scistarter.org/curated/The+Library+and+Community+Guide+to+Citizen+Science.pdf)
published by [SciStarter](https://scistarter.org/) as an inspiration for the
idea for our publication. Additionally [The Turing
Way](https://the-turing-way.netlify.app/welcome) from the Alan Turing Institute
is worth mentioning as a community model of open science publishing that we look
to emulate.

## An Open Science publication

The publication will be produced as an Open Access publication and use Open
Science practices – where appropriate – to ensure the research is open and
reusable as possible, including: open data, open standards, PIDs, open peer
review, open source software, and open methods, etc.

© 2021 the authors. All content licensed Creative Commons:
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA 4.0), unless otherwise
stated. <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/> \| Publication:
<https://github.com/CitSci-WG/guide>

## References

Ayris, Paul, Bernal, Isabel, Cavalli, Valentino, Dorch, Bertil, Frey, Jeannette,
Hallik, Martin, Hormia-Poutanen, Kristiina, et al. “LIBER Open Science Roadmap”.
Zenodo, July 2, 2018. doi: <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1303002>. Page 29.

Cavalier, Darlene, Caroline Nickerson, Robin Salthouse, and Dan Stanton, eds.
The Library & Community Guide to Citizen Science. SciStarter, 2020 (Revised
2021). <http://media.scistarter.org/curated/The+Library+and+Community+Guide+to+Citizen+Science.pdf>.

Arnold, Becky, Louise Bowler, Sarah Gibson, Patricia Herterich, Rosie Higman,
Anna Krystalli, Alexander Morley, Martin O’Reilly, Kirstie Whitaker, and The
Turing Way Community. The Turing Way: A Handbook for Reproducible Data Science, 2019. <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3233986>.  

---

**Footer**

© 2021 the authors. All content licensed Creative Commons:
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA 4.0), unless otherwise
stated. <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/> \| Publication:
<https://github.com/CitSci-WG/guide>.

Imprint: Responsible for the content of the domain https://github.com/CitSci-WG/guide/ - Simon Worthington (LIBER CSWG Secretary), Lausitzer Platz 10, 10997 Berlin, Germany. E-mail: simon.worthington AT tib.eu - Internet: [https://libereurope.eu/working-group/liber-citizen-science-working-group/](https://libereurope.eu/working-group/liber-citizen-science-working-group/). The respective authors are responsible for the content of their posts.

Data protection: No data trackers are used on this site and no personal information is stored. Version 1.0, 25 Jan 2021.
